what do i mean with sentience there are
actually two properties first you need a
consciousness that
means how it feels like a an awareness
like i can touch the table
and i know how it feels like when i
touch the table
so you also need a second property
that's a utility function
now that means preferences positive and
negative evaluations
we need to demonstrate two things
whether the insect is conscious and
whether the insect has a utility
function what we do know is that
insects they have an integrated
behavioral control system
in the brain so a lot of perceptual
inputs
vision touch smell and they have to
integrate it
flies for example have a consciousness
in the sense that
they are consciously aware of their body
position in space
also complex learning systems
a nice experiment with bumblebees they
can
learn to roll balls to a target in the
middle there's a target and then
they get a droplet of sweet sugar water
um
these bumblebees can easily learn this
task to roll the ball into
you can look at the video on youtube
how they learn it when the balls have
another color
they again know how to do it
and also you can see it in this
experiment some of the balls are closer
to the target in the middle
and they choose to roll the ball that's
closest to the
targets they choose to roll that ball so
they know
that they're lazy
that's kind of complex learning
you can see it's a kind of tool use so
for example
fruit flies they like alcohol and they
don't lack electric shocks
so you can yeah these are
animal experiments i have to say warn
you
give them electric shocks and if the
electric shock is really
small then they say i can endure it i
prefer alcohol above the electric shock
so i go for the out
for the alcohol and i get an electric
shock but when you increase the the
level of the electric shock
at one point the trade-off goes in the
other way and say now
the electric shock is worse than then
the alcohol is good for me
so i no longer go to the alcohol
this kind of switching the trade-off
that means they have a complex utility
function
um they have to be able to compare the
preference for alcohol and the
preference for
no electric shocks with these also they
have communication
complex utility functions and especially
they can communicate
so they can make trade-offs and you know
about the b dance the vocal tense
this is a how they communicate their own
trade-offs that's even more
complex it's not that they can compare
preferences but they can also
communicate about it
the b tells to the other bees first the
flower abundance how many flowers are
there how sweet are they
the distance and predation risk and
that's
complex for the other bees to understand
like okay now we have to compare
predation risk with distance um
a sense of the future that's also a nice
one you can make trade-offs between your
preferences now and your preferences in
the nearby future
that requires kind of self-control you
know about the marshmallow tests
so the toddlers they go for the small
the one marshmallow now instead of the
two marshmallows later
they don't have self-control yet with
beasts for example
they can learn self-control and
you can give them the choice between one
small droplet of sugar water now or
more sugar water later and they can
learn
to choose more water later
the other day my girlfriend melissa told
me that she saw
a new video from a natural vegan and i
said wow i'm really glad you saw it and
i didn't see it because i'd probably be
compelled to make some kind of
caddy response video if i were so
unfortunate as to see it
here i was minding my own business and
engaged in an activity
that a natural vegan herself would
definitely approve of
i was in fact ordering a huge tub
of vegan protein powder online
when to my great misfortune i clicked
on and started listening to in the
background the new video from a natural
vegan
okay now let's talk about sentience
i brought this up in one of my recent
videos
criticizing and replying to a natural
vegan and i did
actually get several messages sent in to
me i received
messages in different forms different
content saying oh no no no
unnatural vegan just misspoke she really
does
understand the strict definition of
sentience
she just happened to use her words
incorrectly
when she made the ridiculous claim
ridiculous that social insects
such as bees and ants when she made the
claim that insects
do not have sentience or that scientists
are genuinely divided and are yet to
determine
whether or not they have sentience now a
game that unnatural vegan likes to play
with her opponents
is have you even looked that word up in
a dictionary
she does that all the time i've seen her
done it and all do it all kinds of
snotty and insincere ways
let's look up the word sentient in the
dictionary
sentient able to perceive
or feel things
sentient sentience has to do with
feeling period and that's in the
etymology of the word
going back to original latin usage
sentience is about feeling
it's not about dreaming it's not about
planning for the future it's not about
complex philosophical cognition
feeling now many people are misled
as to what sentience is because most of
the debates we hear about it in modern
western culture growing up
are from science fiction where we're
normally talking about the emergence of
sentience
um amongst computers or robots and we
have this dream
this fantasy that computers develop
more and more sophisticated uh
capabilities in terms of
memory and seeming intelligence
and then at some point when they're
incredibly advanced
they cross over a threshold from not
merely
mimicking human intelligence from not
merely following human instructions
they pass over a threshold into being
genuinely
sentient in their own right this script
has played out on i think on every major
science fiction tv show definitely
including the star trek the next
generation
series and numerous others star trek the
next generation
had one episode where the robot
character the android
is literally put on trial to determine
whether or not he's
he's accountable for his decisions in
the same way that human being is whether
he is
in some sense sentient or truly alive or
truly aware
now that puts in people's mind the
expectation that when we are
debating animal sentience we look at a
dog
as if it were a computer or a very
advanced robot
that the dog mimics human emotions that
it mimics
human reason and that it follows human
instructions that humans can train the
dog
to perform complex tasks in the same way
that we train a computer or train aurora
to
but only at some higher level do they
become sentient
and this is completely false the reason
why
computers and robots are thought of this
way and not animals
is precisely because sentience is about
feeling
it's about response to stimuli now even
if you did not know that
there's a relatively advanced test for
self-awareness
self-awareness is not the same as
sentience which is called the mirror
test
okay i quote wikipedia a belgian
study from 2015 proved that
three different species of ant gives the
latin names for the three different
species of ant did
pass the mirror test this is a test
where they take an ant
and they put a tiny dot of blue paint on
the ant's
face apparently face is not the
scientifically correct term to use for
an ant
but we continue nevertheless and they
see if the ant
recognizes that this is a picture of
oneself when it looks in the mirror
takes an interest sees the blue dot and
then
feels at its own face trying to get rid
of or deal with the blue dot
so in other words the ant doesn't just
look at the mirror
and imagine that it's seeing a different
ant it looks in the mirror
and realizes this is a reflection of
myself and this is proven
ostensibly by the fact that the ant
doesn't try to scratch
the blue dot on the mirror it tries to
scratch the blue dot
on its own face wondering what this what
this double pane is
and the test there are tests to make
sure that the ant doesn't just know
that the blue dot is there anyway
whether or not they investigate the blue
dot when left to their own devices
without a mirror whether they're aware
of it somehow by by feeling or what have
you
this is not the case okay ants ants
do not merely have sentience they have
an advanced enough level of
self-awareness
that it shows up in the highly imperfect
frankly
mirror test for advanced cognitive
abilities
for self-reflection for self-awareness
that's not sentience so unnatural vegan
has now repeatedly claimed
that insects do not have sentience and
she has now suggested she has now
recommended eating oysters
because she claims some scientists
some scientists think that oysters
do not have sentience
what's really significant here are not
the details of the proof
that oysters yes even the lowly oyster
is
indeed sentient what's really worth
reflecting on
is the motivation of the liar and
why she is lying to you in both cases
veganism as an ethic is based
on doing the best you can possibly do
and we all admit in some ways being
perfectly vegan in 2018
is impossible i do not know for a fact
but i would assume that the the paint
on the walls of this apartment is not
vegan you can look that up
a very large percentage of indoor paints
are not vegan
the glue that holds my carpet to the
ground
is probably not vegan i don't know that
i didn't buy this carpet i didn't
install it
um the glue that keeps the sole of my
shoes
attached to the shoe is quite possibly
non-vegan although from my perspective i
made every effort to buy
a vegan shoe the shoe doesn't have
leather we live in a world that is in
this way
unbelievably imperfect from a vegan
perspective we live in a world where
i can make every effort to only buy
bread that is vegan
but when i sit down in a restaurant the
bread they serve me
the waiter may tell me it's vegan but it
actually contains chemical additives
like
l-cysteine and the waiter probably
doesn't even know what l-cysteine is
there are trace amounts of things that
are non-vegan we all live
we struggle with the impossibility
of being a hundred percent vegan in a
world that is
zero percent vegan okay with that having
been duly noted
if you sincerely believe that an oyster
is something inert
and unfeeling it puts you in the absurd
position
of believing that the parasites
that live on the back of the oyster have
more animal rights than the oyster
itself
there are smaller sea creatures that
have a very hard tongue
that affix themselves to the shell of
the oyster and gradually drill
through the shell of the oyster to eat
the oyster within
these parasites are somewhat famous in
human history
because people would intentionally
collect them crush them kill them
to produce a shade of purple dye that
was associated with royalty
associated with the purple robes of the
emperor in uh
ancient rome i believe it was associated
with royalty in various medieval
cultures in europe they're after
this is a famous form of of purple dye
coming from a
a an entirely sentient creature you know
there are tiny little crawfish
in the ocean there are tiny little
creatures like that if you just want
something you can you can imagine
that have eyes and a heart and a mouth
that have all the
moving parts we can recognize as
indicating life in a way that oysters do
not
and there are little creatures like that
that literally live
on the back of the oyster so if you
commit to this pernicious
view this excuse that the oyster itself
deserves no animal rights because it
doesn't meet your
ridiculous fictional made-up definition
of sentience
your definition of sentience that has
more to do with the fictional character
of commander data on star trek and you
goddamn know it
your definition of sentience that you
didn't even bother
to check against a common dictionary
let alone look into the medical and
scientific literature about how
sentience and self-awareness are tested
in the sciences
you would have to lament the fact that
vega
that oysters are still not vegan because
it is completely inevitable that you are
scraping off and killing
smaller creatures that live on the back
of the oysters as
parasites in order to kill and eat the
oyster
think about how ridiculous that is
do oysters feel yes they do
they respond to stimuli oysters
all oysters have very simple eyes
on their top surface for lack of a
better an
anatomical term here they can detect the
difference between
shadow and light at low tide
when they open when they are yawning if
a bird flies overhead
such as a seagull they will suddenly
snap shut
this has been incredibly commonly
observed since ancient times
if a dog wanders along and tries to eat
an oyster
again this has been observed and there
are fisherman's stories about it what
have you
tries to stick its nose in most often
tries to stick its tongue in the oyster
will snap
shut in self-defense and the dog will
then drown to death when the tide comes
in in complete misery
as you can imagine this is the sort of
thing that in fisherman's villages in
seaside villages
even though it's only observed once in a
while was very memorable for people
there were a lot of funny stories around
about the oyster that managed to kill a
dog
obviously if you actually look at
videotape of oyster behavior
at the bottom of the deep blue sea you
see all kinds of other examples oysters
actually
are motile they actually do relocate
they
uh go through a procedure of floating up
a little bit in the water and then
uh slamming shut in order to scoot
themselves along and try to get into a
relatively
relatively advantageous position i have
read
genuine scientific reports discussing
and describing this and how this was how
this phenomenon was first discovered
and then how in laboratories they tried
to figure out how oysters actually
relocate
the mystery being that oysters have such
primitive sensory organs how do they
figure out
you know how do they figure out their
upside down and things like this this
was kind of the interest from a
scientific perspective
but none of those scientific reports
had any doubt that oysters
qualified as sentient
i understand why meteors
want to mystify themselves and others
as to the meaning of the word sentient
because they're people who are to be
blunt
really into making excuses for murder
what i do not understand is why
anyone anyone who is ostensibly
vegan no matter how little sincerity you
may have
no matter how little sympathy for the
animals you may have
no matter how little concern for ecology
you may have
no matter how small your sense
of personal responsibility may be
what motivates you to make
these excuses to pass off
pseudoscience as science to lie
now repeatedly about the nature and
definition
of sentience for insects
and oysters to make people feel better
about their bad habits to encourage
people
to eat honey and oysters and mushed up
bugs in bug paste i suppose
what is it that motivates you to try to
draw this
line in a way that's ultimately going to
flatter
and perpetuate the needless exploitation
of animals by human beings
veganism is about doing the best
you can and you may have to kill
cockroaches every day
you may have to don't make the excuse
don't kid yourself the cockroaches are
alive
they're sentient they desire they feel
they suffer and they die
and if you've got to kill them don't
take any joy in it
don't indulge in any kind of
self-deception face up to your own moral
responsibility
accept the imperfections that come with
this life buckle down
and live it
you